---
layout: post
title: How To Install NVIDIA/CUDA On Your Instance
permalink: /gce-cuda/
---

We will install the required drivers for using GPUs for training deep models. But before we begin, remember:


# When you are *not* using an instance - stop it

Now that we are done with this, let's SSH into our machine like we learned in the [previous guide](https://nirbenz.github.io/gce-tutorial/).

# Install CUDA and cuDNN

## What Are Those?
For those of you not familiar - these are basically the drivers required for using GPUs (*Graphical Processing Units* - sometimes in this context also called *GPGPUs* where the other *GP* stands for *General Purpose*). Installing them is a lot of fun.

## Installing CUDA


Let's first make sure we don't have an older version installed by hitting `sudo apt-get purge nvidia* cuda* `

Also do this just in case:

```
sudo apt-get autoremove 
sudo dpkg -P cuda-repo-ubuntu1604
```

Some prerequisites:

```
sudo apt-get update -y && \
sudo apt-get install -y build-essential git gcc-multilib && \
sudo apt-get install -y linux-headers-$(uname -r)
sudo apt-get install build-essential gcc-multilib dkms
```

### Install NVIDIA Drivers
CUDA and NVIDIA drivers are actually two different things. CUDA packages usually contain an older version of the drivers, so it's best to install the two separately. Note that we will be installing **version 410**. Installing NVIDIA drivers can be done like this:

```
wget http://us.download.nvidia.com/XFree86/Linux-x86_64/410.73/NVIDIA-Linux-x86_64-410.73.run && \
chmod +x NVIDIA-Linux-x86_64-*.run && \
sudo ./NVIDIA-Linux-x86_64-*.run --dkms -s && \
rm -rf ./NVIDIA-Linux-x86_64-*.run

```

#### Test this:

Do this to list all available devices:
```
nvidia-smi -q | head && ls -la /dev | grep nvidia 
```

If for some reason this fails, do
```
sudo modprobe nvidia
```

and try again. Now let's install CUDA:

### Install CUDA 9.2

For this guide we will use the stable CUDA-9.2 which works with the latest TF/PyTorch versions. CUDA-10 is out now but isn't fully supported by the latest frameworks. Once it is, installing a newer version should be straightforward from this guide.

Again, we don't use the *deb* installation but rather the *runfile* one. It simply extracts files into /usr/local/cuda-<version> with a symlink from /usr/local/cuda.

The CUDA runfile installer can be downloaded from NVIDIA's websie. But what you download is a package the following three components:

1. an NVIDIA driver installer, but usually of stale version;
2. the actual CUDA installer;
3. the CUDA samples installer;

```
wget https://developer.nvidia.com/compute/cuda/9.2/Prod2/local_installers/cuda_9.2.148_396.37_linux && \
chmod +x cuda_* && \
mkdir nvidia && \
./cuda_*linux -extract=`pwd`/nvidia && \
cd nvidia && \
sudo ./cuda-linux*.run -noprompt && \
cd .. && rm -rf nvidia && \
rm cuda_*linux
```

For this type of installation it's best to manually add the required binaries to `PATH` by:

```
echo "export PATH=\$PATH:/usr/local/cuda-9.2/bin" >> ~/.bashrc && \
echo "export LD_LIBRARY_PATH=\$LD_LIBRARY_PATH:/usr/local/cuda-9.2/lib64" >> ~/.bashrc && \
source ~/.bashrc
```

We should be done now! To check that this worked, let's invoke:

```
nvcc --version
```

Which should output:

```bash
>>> nvcc: NVIDIA (R) Cuda compiler driver
>>> Copyright (c) 2005-2018 NVIDIA Corporation
>>> Built on Tue_Jun_12_23:07:04_CDT_2018
>>> Cuda compilation tools, release 9.2, V9.2.148
```


## Install cuDNN

### Register and Download

*cuDNN*, unlike *CUDA*, requires us to register with NVIDIA's developer center. Let's do that by going [here](https://developer.nvidia.com/rdp/cudnn-download). Once done, download the correct *cuDNN* distribution. Note that for this guide, we want to get version *7.4.1* and nothing earlier or later. Archived versions are in [this](https://developer.nvidia.com/rdp/cudnn-archive) link.

We want to download **Download cuDNN v7.4.1 (Nov 8, 2018), for CUDA 9.2**. [This](https://developer.nvidia.com/rdp/cudnn-archive#a-collapse705-9) might work directly, again. The file we want will always be called **cuDNN Library for Linux** (and not the ones with **Deb**). 
Download it and place in your homedir inside the machine. For version 7.4.1 it will be called *cudnn-9.2-linux-x64-v7.4.1.5.tgz*. Since you must register to download it, you will most likely have to move it from your computer to the remote machine. Let's:

```
gcloud compute scp --recurse \
	Downloads/cudnn-9.2-linux-x64-v7.4.1.5.tgz instance-01:~/
```

### Now Install

From your homedir invoke the following. This extracts the cuDNN binaries to the *cuda-9.2* directory.

```
sudo tar xvf cudnn-9.2-linux-x64-v7.4.1.5.tgz --strip-components=1 -C /usr/local/cuda-9.2/
```

## Installing Deep Learning Libraries

It is up to you to decide what libraries you might want to use in this course. We direct you to follow the instructions on both websites for [PyTorch](https://pytorch.org/) and [TensorFlow](https://www.tensorflow.org/), but read the next part first.

### Anaconda and Miniconda

Starting Assignment 2 we believe it's better to use Anaconda for managing python environments and packages. For assignment one we used a simple *virtualenv* but it's not a recommended option for heavier projects.

Like *virtualenv*, *Anaconda* is a *package manger* and a *virtual environemnt manager* packed into one. This means that it has a very rich collection of Python libraries already compiled. It also means it allows you to run standalone environments, possibly with different versions of those libraries. It has become the de-facto standard in the ML/DS industry.

We direct you to the [Anaconda website](http://anaconda.org/), where you can follow instructions to get your system up and running. Follow instructions for Ubuntu systems. 
Once done, we recommend installing the PyTorch *or* Tensorflow using the Anaconda installation method. 

We will actually be installing *miniconda* which contains a smaller number of pre-installed packages.

After reading the instructions you can actually follow ours :-)

```
wget https://repo.continuum.io/miniconda/Miniconda3-latest-Linux-x86_64.sh && \
bash Miniconda3-latest-Linux-x86_64.sh -b -p $HOME/miniconda && \
echo "export PATH=/home/nzvi/miniconda3/bin:\$PATH" >> ~/.bashrc && \
source ~/.bashrc
```

Once anaconda is actually installed, we can create a new environment using:

```
conda create -n cs231n python=3.6 anaconda
```

To *activate* or *exit/deactivate* an environment, we will use `source activate cs231n` and `deactivate`, respectively. 

To install a specific TF or PyTorch version we can specify them in the installer once inside an environment. I'd use:

```
conda install -c pytorch pytorch=0.4.1
```

Note that the first `pytorch` directs Anaconda to use a specific *channel*.

For TF, use:

```
conda install -c conda-forge tensorflow=1.8.0
```

### Test Insallation

With TF, invoking the following test code(s) inside a Python shell should make sure you are fine.

```
import tensorflow as tf
 
 
class SquareTest(tf.test.TestCase):
  def testSquare(self):
    with self.test_session():
      x = tf.square([2, 3])
      self.assertAllEqual(x.eval(), [4, 9])
 
 
if __name__ == '__main__':
  tf.test.main()
```

For PyTorch, try this:

```
from __future__ import print_function
import torch
x = torch.rand(5, 3)
print(x)
```

Assuming this worked, our environment is now ready!

### Working with Conda

During the course, especially the project part, there's a high chance you'll be needing all sorts of external libraries. Those almost always exist in some **pip** format. Pip is Python's native package manager (actually called PyPi).

Anaconda, as we mentioned, has it's own package management system which has better tracking of version dependencies. Always look for a Conda version before using `pip install <...>`. In most cases simply hitting `conda install` instead will work out of the box.


### Some Extra Packages

I'd recommend also installing *OpenCV*. It's the industry standard for working with images (although assignment 1 actually depended on the simpler, older *PIL*). To install:

```
conda install -c conda-forge opencv==3.4.3
```

Getting the hand of it?

# Now, Shut Down Your Instance!










